# Implementer's Notes on Supporting ECMAScript 3rd and 5th Editions

Having implemented an interpreter for the 1st edition of ECMAScript,
adding support for more recent versions seemed like the next logical
step for [_mjs_](https://github.com/mras0/mjs).

As you may or may not know (in which case you can read more at e.g.  [A
Brief History of
JavaScript](https://auth0.com/blog/a-brief-history-of-javascript/))
there were never any ECMAScript 2nd or 4th editions, so "only" the
[3rd](http://www.ecma-international.org/publications/files/ECMA-ST-ARCH/ECMA-262,%203rd%20edition,%20December%201999.pdf)
and [5.1th](http://www.ecma-international.org/ecma-262/5.1/ECMA-262.pdf)
editions need work.

Early on I decided to keep support for older versions even while
implementing the newer ones as I thought it would be neat to be able to
switch the interpreted version at runtime (or at least on start-up). In
the grand scheme of things this turned out to not cause too much extra
work, and it helped improve conformance for both the older and latest
versions.

Speaking of conformance, I don't claim full conformance with any of the
standards even though I've tried my best. Turns out understanding a
computer language specification is hard. Doubly so when you want to
reach the same conclusions as your fellow implementers. A large part of
testing has been comparing my implementation to existing ones
and poring over the specification(s) to figure out who was wrong. This
is of course a little bit dangerous as there is no such thing (that I
know of at least) as a reference ES5.1 implementation to check against -
most actually implement bits beyond ES5.1 and/or have exhibit legacy
behavior in some corner cases.

The implementation also relies heavily on the C++ standard library for
things like number parsing, calendar and regular expression
support. While I've tried to make sure all the tested platforms behave
correctly, there will are places where conformance suffers because of my
laziness.

Snapshots of the code where I _thought_ I was done with the various
versions can be browsed here:
- [ES1](https://github.com/mras0/mjs/tree/InitialES1)
- [ES3](https://github.com/mras0/mjs/tree/InitialES3)
- [ES5](https://github.com/mras0/mjs/tree/InitialES5)

This document was written at around the point of initial ES5 support
being done.

If you notice anything wrong in the text or with the code, [let me
know](https://github.com/mras0/mjs/issues) (though I don't promise to
follow up).

## What Went Right

As mentioned in the introduction, keeping support for older ECMAScript
editions turned out to be the right decision. It helped retain the value
of the work put into supporting the older editions and prepared the
source code and myself for the mindset needed for _strict mode_, where
many rules change for individual functions (and sometimes expressions).
Seeing as how the ECMAScript specification writers also seem to like to
flip-flop on decisions (see the quirks section), this also keeps code
alive and tested that will become useful when implementing later
versions.

Implementing new features as complete "slices" (where all the necessary
lexer, parser and interpreter changes are made for the feature before
moving on the next one), rather than making say all lexer changes, then
all parser changes, etc., helped in giving a sense of progress and
accomplishment during the otherwise daunting task of supporting a new
version.

When starting work on a new ECMAScript edition I initially gathered a
list of new features and changes and grouped them in a way I though made
sense to implement them in. I also made notes on which features might be
interdependent, so I could either implement them together or make
appropriate stubs or placeholders. Things that look like they might just
be additions to the standard library sometimes turn out to hide major
restructurings in other parts of the code, while language extensions
that look big turn out to be easily implementable in isolation.

Taking a cue from [oil
shell](https://www.oilshell.org/blog/2017/12/15.html) I've tried to keep
the lexer "dumb" (though still versioned), keep most
context-sensitive logic in the parser and let it direct mode changes and
handle validation. There's room for improvement in their interaction as
the parser sometimes duplicates logic found in the browser for instance
when recognizing octal literals in strict mode string literals. Given
that ES1 with its semi-colon insertion rules already more or less
mandates an impure parser it seemed like the natural place to add more
complexity.

Overall - except for the cases noted below - the structure of the code
after finishing initial ES1 support was very conductive for implementing
the later versions. Most changes could be made incrementally and the
overall structure of the code is mostly unchanged. With some minor
additions the [garbage
collector](https://mras0.github.io/mjs/doc/gc/initial.html),
representation of values, and object model could be adapted.

Implementing support for ES3 went like a (comparable) breeze and apart
from regular expression literals making the lexer context sensitive (see
above note) the language changes seemed for the most part logical and
reasonable. Most of the additions are either sorely missed conveniences
like array and object literals, function definitions as expressions or
simple language constructs found in similar languages: `do..while`,
`switch`, strict equality comparisons and support for exceptions.

## What Went Wrong

ES5... Well "wrong" is probably too strong a word (but fits with the
classic game postmortem headlines), but supporting ES5 definitely caused
more headaches than ES3. On the surface it might seem like there weren't
that many changes between ES3 and ES5.1 apart from a bunch of new
standard library features, but actually supporting all the features
required a complete rework (which is at the time of writing not
finalized) of how object properties are handled.

In ES1 and ES3 object properties are simple: Sure the user can add,
change and remove properties, but only simple ones and they always
behave the same (enumerable, writable and configurable). This all
changes in ES5 where evil evil functions like `Object.defineProperty`
and moral equivalents allow the user to impede all my attempts at
optimizations and cleverness. Combined with the addition of getters and
setters has left all my dreams of having an optimized `Array` object in
temporary ruins.

The appearance of getters and setters also means that the most standard
library functions (which are all implemented in C++) are littered with
_stale pointer use_ bugs. A large task in exposing and correcting
these awaits, or admitting failure and inhibiting garbage collection
while a native function is executing. An example of this kind of problem
looks like this:

```C++
// Unsafe in ES5 mode!
void copy_property(string name, object_ptr o1, object o2) {
    o1->put(name, o2->get(name.view()));
}
```

Copying a property from one object to another, what could possibly go
wrong? Nothing in ES1/ES3, but in ES5 if `name` refers to a property
with a user-defined getter, a garbage collection could be triggered,
moving the object pointed to by `o1` and leaving the result of
`o1->`stale (if the compiler chose to evaluate it before the call to
`o2->get`!).

Fixing it is a simple matter of rewriting the expression to make sure
the call to `o2->get` is fully evaluated before `o1->`:

```C++
// Safe in all modes (assuming valid arguments)
void fixed_copy_property(string name, object_ptr o1, object o2) {
    const value v = o2->get(name.view());
    o1->put(name, v);
}
```

Finding all of these new problems - especially when they're not
guaranteed to occur due to differences in the generated code - is going
to be an ongoing challenge for a good while, I fear.

It also seems like, that while adding support for ES5 the need to access the
global context arose in more places than before. I may be too emotionally
attached to my decision to not have an easily accessible global context to
change it now, but my recommendation for other ECMAScript implementers would be
to just give in, and keep it in thread-local storage for easy retrieval. Know
which hill to die on. Unlike me.

When running the test suite it can also be felt that the number of tests
have grown a lot while the attention to speed has been put on the
back burner. This is of course a natural development as I have been
prioritizing correctness, but the code feels in need of a round of
optimizations. Luckily I now have better test coverage to ensure the
hard work on conformance isn't compromised.

## A Small Collection of ECMAScript Quirks

What follows is a loose collection of notes of funny/sad/interesting
ECMAScript behavior I've noticed. It's highly likely that I'm just wrong
and have misinterpreted the specification(s) and/or relied too much on
the observed behavior of other interpreters.

For more "fun" have a look at some of the test cases in the source code.

Or come up with an appropriate set of tests for the 54 steps of
`Array.prototype.splice` (ES3, 15.4.4.12) or try to figure out new ways
my eternal nemesis `Object.defineProperty` can hurt me and break my code.

### Labelled Statements

Starting out soft (and maybe controversial) here and I know they're in
Java, but really they shouldn't have been part of ECMAScript. The need
for them is rare and the code can always be structured in ways that make
them unnecessary. Their rarity also means that the future maintainer of
the code will probably be stumbled at first when encountering them.

### Elision of Array Literal Items

ECMAScript allows you to elide items in an array literal:

```Javascript
[1,,2,]
```

produces a list of length 3 with `[0] === 1` and `[2] === 2` but `[1]`
not defined (i.e. the array doesn't have a `1` property). Multiple items
can be elided in this way. Also notice that the final comma is a
_trailing comma_, which doesn't contribute to the length of the array,
not an elided item (it seems ancient versions of Internet Explorer
didn't implement this rule)!

I don't feel too strongly either way about this feature, but don't find
myself wanting or needing it often and where it might make sense - say
for a spare lookup table - I'd worry about the readability.

### Switch Statements

In ECMAScript the case clauses of switch statements are allowed to be
full expressions, which means that:

```Javascript
switch (2) {
case (console.log('A'),0):
case (console.log('B'),1):
case (console.log('C'),2):
case (console.log('C'),3):
}
```
prints A, B and C.

Another quirk is that:

```Javascript
switch (0){default:}
```

is legal in ECMAScript but a syntax error in most other languages (that
I'm familiar with). A - possibly empty - statement is usually required
after `default:`.

### Flip-flopping on Decisions

- Should format control characters be stripped from the source code
  before processing? ES1 is silent, ES3 says yes, ES5 says no.
- ES3: Let's reserve a bunch of keywords! ES5: Nah, let's not
  (`abstract` etc.)
- Redefining properties in object literals? OK in ES3 and non-strict ES5,
  `SyntaxError` under some conditions in strict mode. Except it seems to
  be changed back to the old behavior in ES6.

### Naming of Property Attributes

In ECMAScript 1st and 3rd editions properties can have certain
attributes:

- ReadOnly
- DontEnum
- DontDelete

in the 5th edition these are now inverted and called:

- Writable
- Enumerable
- Configurable

While the first two are arguably better names, I'm not (yet?) fond of
"Configurable". There is more to a property being
"Configurable" than what used to be implied by (not DontDelete) in the
new property model in ES5, and perhaps the "subtle" change without giving
me a good mental model is what is fueling my suspicion towards this
change.

### Direct Call to `eval`

Like the heading says calls to `eval` behaves differently on whether the
call is made directly (`eval(...)`) or indirectly (`e=eval; e(...);` or
`(0,eval)(...)`). I guess this is to allow more advanced interpreters to
pre-evaluate some direct calls to `eval`? Either way it feels dirty to
have this distinction.

### Strict Mode

I'm all for strict mode and advise you to employ whenever possible. That
said some of the rules seem pretty arbitrary and some of them required
(in my implementation) some nasty hacks to realize. Some cases of note
(again be aware that it's likely that I'm simply misreading the
specification):

```Javascript
'use strict'; function f(a,a){} // SyntaxError
```

Great, another error caught early! Duplicate parameter names aren't allowed.

```Javascript
'use strict'; f=Function('a','a',''); // Should also fail, right?
```

Doesn't throw an error though. The function body needs to be strict for
it to fail.

A slightly amusing example is:

```Javascript
function f() { '\012';'use strict'; }
```

is specified to fail on the octal escape sequence because they are not
allowed in strict mode function bodies. Yeah, that's another special
case in the parser...
